3-Frame translation (forward)	Translation of a nucleotide sequence in all three possible reading frames in one direction, usually "on the top strand" of DNA.
	
3-Frame translation (reverse)	Translation of a nucleotide sequence in all three possible reading frames in the reverse direction, usually "on the bottom strand" of DNA.
	
AA sequence	Amino acid sequence.
	
Affymetrix genotyped SNP probes	Probes on Affymetrix SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) arrays, which are used for SNP genotyping. See Affymetrix microarray technology and <a href="http://www.affymetrix.com/technology/mrd_technology.affx">www.affymetrix.com/technology/mrd_technology.affx</a>
	
Affymetrix microarray technology	Microarray manufacturing technology developed by Affymetrix. Combines semiconductor fabrication techniques, solid phase chemistry, combinatorial chemistry, molecular biology, and robotics to generate a photolithographic manufacturing process in which oligonucleotides are synthesized directly on a chip. See <a href="http://www.affymetrix.com/technology/manufacturing/index.affx">www.affymetrix.com/technology/manufacturing/index.affx</a>
	
Affymetrix probes	Probe on an Affymetrix microarray designed to determine whether or not the complementary sequence of RNA or DNA is present in a sample. Generally 25 nucleotides in length (25-mers), their short length provides higher specificity than longer probes. See Affymetrix microarray technology and <a href="http://www.affymetrix.com/technology/design/index.affx">www.affymetrix.com/technology/design/index.affx</a>
	
Amitochondriate	Eukaryotic organism that lacks a mitochondrion. Examples include Giardia and other parasites such as Trachipleistophora and Entamoeba. However, most of these organisms contain what appear to be mitochondrial remnants as well as mitochondrial genes in their nuclear genomes.
	
Annotation	Identified feature within a sequence, such as a known or predicted gene, domain, motif, post-translational modification, etc.
	
Annotation density	Level to which a nucleotide or protein sequence has been annotated. See Annotation.
	
Apicoplast	Nonphotosynthetic plastid found in almost all protozoan parasites belonging to the phylum Apicomplexa that have been examined. The apicoplast is surrounded by four membranes, giving rise to the theory that its presence in the Apicomplexa is the result of a secondary endosymbiosis (acquired by the engulfment of an ancestral alga and retention of the algal plastid). Similar to other endosymbiotic organelles (mitochondria, chloroplasts), the apicoplast contains its own genome as well as proteins that are encoded in the nucleus and post-translationally imported. The apicoplast is a vital organelle to the parasite's long-term survival.
	
ApiCyc	Database/utility on ApiDB used for searching and visualizing metabolic pathway information for organisms in ApiDB; derivative database generated by analyzing various genomes (for example from Plasmodium, Cryptosporidium, and Toxoplasma) with SRI International's pathway tools.
	
ApiDots alignments	Consensus sequences found in the ApiDots database and generated by clustering and assembling Apicomplexan mRNA and EST sequences. These consensus sequences were subjected to database searches against protein and protein domain sequences.
	
Attribute	Inherent characteristic or feature; in a database, a data item related to a database object. For example, attributes of genes can include features such as introns and untranslated regions (UTRs).
	
BLAST	Basic local alignment search tool, a sequence similarity search tool used to quickly find local alignments between a query sequence and sequences in nucleotide or protein databases. Different versions of this search tool are available to match the types of query sequence and database used. See blastn, blastp, blastx, tblastn, and tblastx.
	
blastn	Version of the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) used to compare a nucleotide query sequence against a nucleotide sequence database.
	
blastp	Version of the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) used to compare a protein query sequence against a protein sequence database.
	
blastx	Version of the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) used to compare a nucleotide query sequence translated in all reading frames against a protein sequence database.
	
Boolean	System of logical thought developed by George Boole (1815-1864). In Boolean searching, an "and" operator between two words or values (for example, "apple AND orange") generates a search for items in a database containing both of the words or values. Similarly, an "or" operator between two words or values (for example, "apple OR orange") generates a search for items containing either word.
	
cDNA	Complementary DNA. DNA molecule synthesized by the enzyme reverse transcriptase using an mRNA as template.
	
cDNA microarray	Collection of microscopic cDNA spots commonly representing single genes and arrayed on a solid surface (commonly glass slides) by covalent attachment to chemically suitable matrices. Used for expression profiling, the monitoring of the expression levels of hundreds or thousands of genes simultaneously.
	
CDS	Coding sequence. Region of nucleotides that corresponds to the sequence of amino acids in a predicted protein and that includes start and stop codons. Unexpressed sequences (for example, the 5'-UTR, the 3'-UTR, and introns) are not included within a CDS. The CDS usually does not correspond to the actual mRNA sequence.
	
Centromere	Region of the chromosome or chromosomal structure essential for division and retention of the chromosome within the cell; point of a chromosome where the spindle fibers attach to pull the chromosome apart during cell division. 
	
Chromosome	Macromolecule of DNA constituting the physical organization of DNA in a cell.
	
Coil	Three-dimensional spiral structure in protein macromolecules.
	
Contig	Contiguous genomic sequence assembled from overlapping primary sequences representing overlapping regions of a particular chromosome.
	
CryptoCyc	Database/utility built by analyzing the Cryptosporidium genome with SRI International's pathway tools; used for searching and visualizing Cryptosporidium metabolic pathway information.
	
Curated annotation	Annotation made under the supervision of a curator as opposed to a purely computational prediction. Curated predictions often contain combinations of different types of evidence to support the annotation.
	
Dalton	Unit of mass abbreviated Da and used to express atomic and molecular masses.

Deprecated gene	Genes in GiardiaDB with little or no evidence (similarities / expression) that overlapped (or were subsumed by) larger genes for which there was evidence such as protein similarities, expression evidence from EST alignments, SAGE or proteomics data were marked as deprecated.  These genes will likely be removed in a subsequent release of GiardiaDB (and in GenBank) unless additional evidence is provided indicating they should be moved into the real gene category.
	
DNA/GC content	Content of guanine (G) and cytosine (C) in a fragment of DNA or a genome. Because GC pairs are more thermostable compared to the AT pairs, it was commonly believed that GC content played a vital part in adaptation to high temperatures, a hypothesis that has been refuted. In the genome browser, the DNA/GC content track displays a GC content graph of the reference sequence at low magnifications and the DNA sequence itself at higher magnifications.
	
EC numbers	Enzyme Commission numbers. EC numbers constitute the numerical classification scheme for enzymes based on the chemical reactions they catalyze. EC numbers do not refer to the enzymes, but to the reactions they catalyze.
	
ePCR	Electronic PCR (polymerase chain reaction). Computational procedure used to check for uniqueness in spacing and number of primer binding sites within DNA sequences. Searches for subsequences that closely match a set of PCR primers and that have the correct order, orientation, and spacing to make a PCR product. Used to check the expected length of a PCR product, which can provide information regarding unexpected repetitive sequences.
	
EST	Expressed sequence tag. Short (typically 100-500 base pairs) partial cDNA produced by single-shot sequencing of a cloned mRNA (cDNA) and often used to identify gene transcripts.
	
EST alignments	Alignments of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) with a corresponding genomic region. For example, in ToxoDB you can visualize EST alignments by clicking on the "View this sequence in the genome browser" link and turning on the EST Alignments track. Useful for identifying intron boundaries.
	
EST clusters	Groups of homologous, overlapping EST sequences created to reduce redundancy of the EST database.
	
Expression level	Level at which an mRNA or protein is present in a sample. Value can be absolute or relative to other mRNA or protein species in the sample.
	
Expression profile	Pattern of expression of one or more genes or proteins over time or over a set of experimental conditions (for example, during development or treatment, or as a result of a genetic mutation such as a knockout). 
	
Expression profile correlation	Method for correlation of gene expression profiles with gene ontology (GO) annotations developed for the purpose of identifying groups of genes, pathways, and processes reacting in concert to experimental perturbations.
	
Expression timing	Timing of gene expression during a developmental, metabolic, regulatory, or other biological process or response.
	
Gametocyte	Eukaryotic germ cell that divides by mitosis to generate other gametocytes or by meiosis to generate gametes. Male gametocytes are called spermatocytes, and female gametocytes are called oocytes. Term often used to describe gametocytes of Plasmodium.
	
GBrowse	Interactive genome browser developed by the Generic Model Organism Database (GMOD) project (<a href="http://www.gmod.org">www.gmod.org</a>) that can be customized to show selected chromosomal features as well as display user-provided annotations.
	
GBrowse track	In the GBrowse viewer, a line of data that corresponds to a particular type of genomic information or feature and that is distinguished by a particular shape or color.
	
GenBank protein record	Protein sequence file in the GenBank database generally derived by translation of a related nucleotide record.
	
Gene	Fundamental physical and functional unit of heredity. Ordered sequence of nucleotides located in a particular position on a particular chromosome that encodes a specific functional product, such as a protein or RNA molecule. A gene may have a number of parts, including the promoter region, untranslated regions (5' and 3' UTRs), introns, and exons.
	
GeneDB	Project developed by the Sanger Institute Pathogen Sequencing Unit (PSU) and aimed at developing and maintaining curated database resources for all projects handled by the PSU. The database is accessible at <a href="http://www.genedb.org">www.genedb.org</a>
	
Genetic markers	Known DNA sequences that can be identified by a simple assay. Generally genetic variations caused by mutation or alterations in loci that can be observed, examples include restriction length polymorphisms (RFLPs), short tandem repeats (STRs), variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs), short DNA sequences surrounding single base-pair changes (single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs), or longer microsatellite sequences.
	
Genomic context	Location of a gene in the genome, which can influence the expression of the gene and functional interactions of the gene expression products. In this database, genes are depicted on individual gene pages with their surrounding genomic region and annotations.
	
Genotyped SNPs	Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) identified during genotyping of individual Toxoplasma and Plasmodium strains. See SNP genotyping.
	
Genotyping	Process of determining the genotype of an individual with a biological assay using PCR, DNA sequencing, or hybridization to DNA microarrays or beads. Provides a measurement of the genetic variation between members of a species.
	
GenPept protein	Protein record from the GenPept database at the NCBI GenBank, which contains inferred translations of protein-coding sequences.
	
GLEAN gene	Predicted gene sequence generated by GLEAN, an algorithm that integrates different sources of gene structure evidence (for example, gene model predictions, EST and protein sequence alignments to the genome, and SAGE or peptide tags) to produce a consensus gene prediction in the absence of known genes.
	
GO	Gene Ontology project. Collaborative project that has developed three structured, controlled vocabularies (ontologies) to describe gene products in terms of their associated biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions in a species-independent manner. The use of a consistent vocabulary allows genes from different species to be compared based on their GO annotations.
	
GO component	Gene Ontology term used to describe a cellular component, or the location where a gene product may act, rather than physical features of proteins or RNAs. For example, membrane (GO:0016020), extrinsic to membrane (GO:0019898), and integral to membrane (GO:0016021).
	
GO function	Gene Ontology term used to describe the molecular function of a gene product, the jobs that it performs, or the "abilities" that it has (for example, transporting compounds, binding to things, holding things together, and changing one thing into another). This is different from the biological processes the gene product is involved in, which involve more than one activity.
	
GO process	Gene Ontology term used to describe a biological process, a recognized series of events, or molecular functions associated with a gene product. A biological process is not equivalent to a pathway, though some GO terms do describe pathways. 
	
GO term	Gene Ontology term. The building blocks of the Gene Ontology, each term is assigned to one of the three ontologies: molecular function, cellular component, or biological process. Each GO term consists of a unique alphanumerical identifier, a common name, synonyms (if applicable), and a definition. When a term has multiple meanings depending on species, the GO uses a "sensu" tag to differentiate among them. For example, the enzyme fumarase has the GO term GO:0004333, fumarate hydratase activity (fumarase activity), catalysis of the reaction: (S)-malate = fumarate + H2O. 
	
GPI anchor	C-terminal post-translational modification of many eukaryotic proteins. The two fatty acids within the glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) moiety anchor the protein to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane. GPI-anchored proteins are believed to be involved in signal transduction and immune responses, as well as the pathobiology of many parasites.
	
HMM	Hidden Markov model. Statistical model in which the system being modeled is assumed to be a Markov process with unknown parameters, and the challenge is to determine the hidden parameters from the observable parameters. The extracted model parameters can then be used to perform further analysis, for example for pattern recognition applications.
	
Homolog	Related by evolutionary descent, either between species (ortholog) or within a species (paralog).
	
Hydropathy	Hydropathicity. Degree to which a peptide or protein is likely to be soluble in water. Protein hydropathy plots can be useful in predicting transmembrane domains, potential antigenic sites, and regions that are likely to be exposed on the protein's surface.
	
Intergenic region	Stretch of DNA located between genes that may act to regulate gene expression.
	
Intersect	Similar to the Boolean operator "AND", an action used in the query history to find items that are common to two query result sets. For example, to search for items that appear in both result set X and result Y, type, "X INTERSECT Y".
	
Join	Similar to the Boolean operator "UNION", an action used in the query history to combine query sets. For example, to combine result sets X and Y, type, "X JOIN Y".
	
KEGG map	Metabolic or regulatory interaction pathway generated by the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) or by the use of their tools (<a href="http://www.genome.jp/kegg/">www.genome.jp/kegg</a>).
	
Locus	Position on a chromosome of a gene, feature (such as a telomere), or other chromosomal marker; also, the DNA at that position. Use of this term is sometimes restricted to mean expressed DNA regions.
	
Low complexity	Pertaining to sequence regions that have an unusually repetitive nature (for example, a protein sequence of low complexity might look like PPTDPPPPKKDGGPPL, and a low-complexity nucleotide sequence might be AAATAAAAAAAAATAAAAAAATTA). Low-complexity regions can create problems in sequence similarity searching by causing artifactual hits. For this reason, filters are often used to remove low-complexity sequences. Low-complexity regions also contribute to antigenic variation in apicomplexan parasites.
	
Mass spec data	Mass spectrometry data. Mass spectrometry is an analytical technique used to measure the mass-to-charge ratios of small molecules in several applications, including identification of proteins or peptides. In our databases, the "Identify Genes by Mass Spec Evidence" query is used to identify genes that have evidence of protein expression based on mass spec data.
	
Metabolic pathways	Series of chemical reactions occurring within a cell and often catalyzed by enzymes. In a pathway, a molecule is often changed or modified into another product, which can be stored by the cell, used as a metabolic product, or used to initiate another pathway.
	
Microarray	Microscopic array of biological molecules (for example, DNA or protein) used to determine the presence and/or amount (referred to as quantitation) of other biomolecules (other proteins, transcripts, etc.) in biological samples.
	
Microsatellite	Polymorphic locus in nuclear and organellar DNA that consists of repeating units of 1-4 base pairs in length. Mostly neutral and codominant, microsatellites are used as molecular markers and to study gene dosage (looking for duplications or deletions of a particular genetic region). Also known as simple sequence repeats (SSRs).
	
Microsatellite map	Map of microsatellite locations and linkages on a genome.
	
Mitochondrion	Organelle responsible for respiration in a eukaryotic cell. Proteins required for mitochondrial function are encoded both in the nucleus and within the smaller mitochondrial genome.
	
Motif search	Tool used to identify and locate sequence patterns (motifs) in protein and nucleic acid sequences. In our databases, this flexible search can be based on the general characteristics of the pattern and not solely on specific sequences (for example, Cys-[9-11 amino acids]-Cys or Leu-Leu-[basic residue]-Val). This allows the user to query using previously undescribed motifs.
	
NCBI	National Center for Biotechnology Information. Established in 1988 as a national resource for molecular biology information, NCBI creates public databases, conducts research in computational biology, develops software tools for analyzing genome data, and disseminates biomedical information - all for the better understanding of molecular processes affecting human health and disease.
	
ncRNA	Noncoding RNA. Any RNA that is not translated into a protein. Includes transfer RNA (tRNA), ribosomal RNA (rRNA), small RNAs such as snoRNAs, microRNAs, siRNAs and piRNAs, as well as long ncRNAs.
	
Nonredundant protein DB (NRDB)	Peptide sequence database containing all nonidentical protein sequences from the same species extracted from GenPept, NCBI RefSeq, Swiss-Prot, and PRF databases. Used for BLAST protein database searches because its smaller size results in shorter search times and more meaningful statistics.
	
Nucmer	NUCleotide MUMmer. Part of the MUMmer alignment package (<a href="www.tigr.org/software/mummer">www.tigr.org/software/mummer</a>), an alignment tool used for the rapid alignment of very large DNA and amino acid sequences.
	
Oligo	Oligonucleotide. Short sequence of DNA or RNA, typically of 20-70 nucleotides.
	
Oligonucleotide microarray	Collection of microscopic oligonucleotide spots arrayed on a solid surface by covalent attachment to chemically suitable matrices. Used for expression profiling, the monitoring of the expression levels of hundreds or thousands of genes simultaneously. Probes for oligonucleotide microarrays are designed to match parts of known or predicted mRNAs.

Open Reading Frame	see ORF
	
ORF	amino acid sequences computed by translating the six frames of raw genomic sequence using the standard genetic code. We save the translated sequences having at least 50 amino acids. The sequences are not annotated nor human reviewed. ORF's do not necessarily begin with methionine residues, but they all terminate with a stop codons.

	
Ortholog	Same gene in different organisms; having evolved from the same ancestral locus.
	
Ortholog group	Orthologous genes shared by group of organisms; the group of genes can also contain paralogs.
	
Orthology-based phylogenetic profile	Tool used to find genes that are present or not present in a desired group of organisms on the tree of life (currently computed for 81 complete genomes). The user has control over the profile and over whether or not genes must be found in any particular group of organisms (for example, in Apicomplexa but not in mammals). Taxa can also be marked as indifferent (for example, it does not matter if the gene is also found in plants). Ortholog and paralog relationships are determined using the OrthoMCL algorithm.
	
OrthoMCL	Genome-scale algorithm for grouping orthologous protein sequences. It provides genes shared by two or more species/genomes and also genes representing species-specific gene expansion families. Therefore, it serves as a utility for automated eukaryotic genome annotation and phylogenetic profiling. Available at <a href="http://orthomcl.org">orthomcl.org</a>
	
Paralog	Related by gene duplication within a genome; originated by duplication and then diverged from the parent copy by mutation and selection or drift.
	
PATS	Neural network analysis tool that identifies amino acid sequences within a query sequence that are potentially targeted to the apicoplast matrix of Plasmodium falciparum.
	
PDB 3D structure	Three-dimensional macromolecular structure in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (<a href="http://www.pdb.org">www.pdb.org</a>) obtained by one of three methods: X-ray crystallography (over 80%), solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (about 16%), or theoretical modeling (2%). A few structures were determined by other methods.
	
Pearson correlation	Pearson Product Moment Correlation, the most common measure of the correlation between two variables. Reflects the degree of linear relationship between two variables and ranges from +1 to -1, with a correlation of +1 indicating a perfect positive linear relationship between variables.
	
Peptide mass fingerprinting	Analytical technique for protein identification wherein an unknown protein of interest is cleaved into peptides by a protease such as trypsin, and the peptides resulting from this cleavage are analyzed using a mass spectrometric method such as MALDI-TOF or ESI-TOF. The masses derived for the peptides are then compared to a database containing known protein sequences or even to the genome. Computer programs theoretically cut the protein sequences in the database into peptides with the same protease (for example trypsin), and calculate the absolute masses of the peptides from each protein. They then compare the masses of the peptides of the unknown protein to the theoretical peptide masses of each protein encoded in the genome. The results are statistically analyzed to find the best match.
	
Pfam domain	Conserved protein region in the Pfam database (<a href="http://pfam.janelia.orgpfam.janelia.org">Pfam.org</a>), a collection of multiple sequence alignments and hidden Markov models covering many common protein families. The alignments may represent evolutionarily conserved structures that may shed light on protein function. Profile hidden Markov models (profile HMMs) built from the Pfam alignments can be useful for associating a new protein to a known protein family, even if the homology is weak. Unlike standard pairwise alignment methods (for example, BLAST and FASTA), Pfam HMMs deal sensibly with multidomain proteins.
	
Phylogeny	Historical relationships among lineages of organisms or their parts, including their genes.
	
PlasmoAP	Algorithm/tool that predicts the likelihood that a protein sequence is targeted to the apicoplast. It provides the position of signal peptide cleavage sites in amino acid sequences if targeting is predicted.
	
PlasmoCyc	Database/utility built by analyzing the genomes of the Plasmodium species in ApiDB with SRI International's pathway tools; used for searching and visualizing Plasmodium metabolic pathway information.
	
ProDom	Database of protein domain families generated from the global comparison of all available protein sequences (<a href="http://prodom.prabi.fr">prodom.prabi.fr</a>).
	
Promoter	Regulatory region of DNA located upstream (towards the 5' region) of a gene and providing a control point for regulated gene transcription.
	
PROSITE motif	Protein sequence pattern or profile derived from multiple alignments of homologous sequences and stored in the PROSITE database, an annotated collection of motif descriptors dedicated to the identification of protein families and domains.
	
Protein-coding	Capable of encoding a protein sequence; generally refers to a sequence of DNA.
	
Proteomics	The large-scale study of proteins, particularly of the full set of proteins encoded by a genome.
	
Pseudogene	Defunct relatives of known genes that have lost their protein-coding ability or are otherwise no longer expressed in the cell. Although they may have some gene-like features (such as promoters, CpG islands, and splice sites), they are nonetheless considered nonfunctional due to their lack of protein-coding ability resulting from various genetic disablements (stop codons, frameshifts, or a lack of transcription) or their inability to function as an RNA (such as with rRNA pseudogenes).
	
PubCrawler	Free service that scans daily updates to the NCBI Medline (PubMed) and GenBank databases and alerts users to any relevant updates. Available at <a href="http://pubcrawler.gen.tcd.ie">pubcrawler.gen.tcd.ie</a>
	
Query	Sequence or term used in a database search. For example, the sequence submitted for a BLAST search is the query sequence.
	
RefSeq mRNA	Nonredundant mRNA sequence in the RefSeq database. RefSeq mRNA sequences with an NM_XXXXXX accession are curated sequences and are, therefore, considered more reliable than those with XM_XXXXXX accessions (predicted mRNA sequences).
	
RefSeq noncoding RNA	Nonredundant noncoding RNA (ncRNA) sequence in the RefSeq database. RefSeq ncRNA sequences with an NR_XXXXXX accession are curated sequences and are, therefore, considered more reliable than those with XR_XXXXXX accessions (predicted ncRNA sequences).
	
RefSeq protein	Nonredundant protein sequence in the RefSeq database. RefSeq protein sequences with NP_XXXXXX accessions are curated sequences and are, therefore, considered more reliable than those with XP_XXXXXX accessions (predicted protein sequences).
	
RefSeqs	NCBI reference sequences. A curated nonredundant collection of sequences representing genomes, transcripts, and proteins as annotated by NCBI. The annotation in these records is often different from the original GenBank submission, which may not be updated every time new information is obtained.
	
Repeat regions	Sequences present in many identical or highly similar copies in the genome.
	
RNA predictions	Predictions of genes that encode nonprotein-encoding RNA's such as tRNA, snoRNA, rRNA, etc.
	
rRNA	Ribosomal RNA. Component of the ribosomes, which function in protein synthesis.
	
SAGE tags	Serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) tags. Short (14-nucleotide) sequences found within mRNA, the relative abundance of which indicates the level of expression of the mRNA containing that tag.
	
Scaffolds	In genomic mapping, a series of contigs that are in the right order and orientation, but not necessarily connected in one continuous stretch of sequence.
	
Sequence similarity	Degree of similarity between two or more protein or nucleotide sequences.
	
Signal peptide	Short (3-60 amino acids) peptide sequence that directs the post-translational transport of a protein to certain organelles or for secretion.
	
SignalP	Program that predicts the presence and location of signal peptide cleavage sites in amino acid sequences from Gram-positive and -negative prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The method incorporates a prediction of cleavage sites and a signal peptide/nonsignal peptide prediction based on a combination of several artificial neural networks and hidden Markov models (HMMs).
	
SNP density	Amount or number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a region of the genome.
	
SNP genotyping	Identifying and mapping single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in an effort to determine the genotype members of a species. SNPs usually consist of two alleles (where the rare allele frequency is less than 1%), are evolutionarily conserved, and are the most common type of genetic variation. See Genotyping.
	
SNP	Single nucleotide polymorphism. Small genetic changes or variations that can occur within a DNA sequence, for example when a single nucleotide, such as an A replacing one of the other three nucleotide letters C, G, or T. Most SNPs are found outside of coding sequences, but SNPs found within a coding sequence are more likely to alter the biological function of a protein. SNPs may be synonymous (generating a conservative change not altering the amino acid sequence) or they can be nonsynonymous and change the amino acid that is encoded.
	
snRNA	Small nuclear RNA. Class of small RNA molecules found within the nucleus, transcribed by RNA polymerase II or III, and involved in a variety of important processes such as RNA splicing (removal of introns from hnRNA), regulation of transcription factors (7SK RNA) or RNA polymerase II (B2 RNA), and maintaining telomeres. They are always associated with specific proteins, and the complexes are referred to as small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNP) or snurps. These elements are rich in uridine. A large group of snRNAs known as small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are small RNA molecules that play an essential role in RNA biogenesis and chemical modification of ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and other RNA genes (tRNA and snRNAs). They are located in the nucleus and the cajal bodies of eukaryotic cells (the major sites of RNA synthesis).
	
Strand	One half of the DNA helix; string or stretch of covalently linked nucleotides.
	
Subtract	Similar to the Boolean operator "NOT", an action used in the query history to remove items from one result set that occur in another result set. For example, to remove items that exist in set Y from those in set X, type, "X SUBTRACT Y".
	
Syntenic	Loci located on the same chromosome but not necessarily linked. For example, genes that are part of a syntenic group share a common chromosomal location. Also used to refer to conservation of gene order across species.
	
tblastn	Version of the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) used to compare a protein query sequence against a translated nucleotide sequence database.
	
tblastx	Version of the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) used to compare the six-frame translations of a nucleotide query sequence against the six-frame translations of a nucleotide sequence database.
	
Telomere	Nucleoprotein complexes that constitute the physical ends of linear eukaryotic chromosomes and that have important functions, primarily in the protection, replication, and stabilization of the chromosome ends. Telomeres often contain lengthy stretches of tandemly repeated simple DNA sequences composed of a G-rich strand and a C-rich strand (called terminal repeats). These terminal repeats are highly conserved. Sequences adjacent to the telomeric repeats are often highly polymorphic and rich in repetitive elements (termed subtelomeric repeats); in some cases, genes have been found in the proterminal regions of chromosomes.
	
TIGR	The Institute for Genomic Research, a nonprofit center dedicated to deciphering and analyzing genomes.
	
TigrScan gene	Gene model generated using TigrScan, a gene-finding tool based on the generalized hidden Markov model (HMM) framework, similar to GENSCAN and Genie. It is highly reconfigurable and includes software for retraining.
	
TM domains	See transmembrane domain.
	
ToxoCyc	Database/utility built by analyzing the Toxoplasma gondii genome with SRI International's pathway tools; used for searching and visualizing Toxoplasma metabolic pathway information.
	
Translation	Synthesis of protein from an mRNA template.
	
Transmembrane domain	Three-dimensional protein structure that is thermodynamically stable in a membrane. This may be a single alpha helix, a stable complex of several transmembrane alpha helices, a transmembrane beta barrel, a beta-helix of gramicidin A, or any other structure. Transmembrane domains average 20 amino acid residues in length, though they may be much smaller or much longer.
	
Transmembrane protein	Protein that spans an entire biological membrane.
	
tRNA	Transfer RNA. Small RNA chain (73-93 nucleotides) that transfers a specific amino acid to a growing polypeptide chain at the ribosomal site of protein synthesis during translation. A three-base region, the anticodon, pairs to the corresponding three-base codon region on the template mRNA. Each type of tRNA molecule can be attached to only one type of amino acid, but because the genetic code contains multiple codons that specify the same amino acid, tRNA molecules bearing different anticodons may also carry the same amino acid.
	
TWINSCAN gene models	Gene models generated using TWINSCAN, a tool that integrates traditional probability models (such as those underlying GENSCAN and FGENESH) with information from alignments between two genomes. TWINSCAN is based on the idea that functional sequences show different patterns of evolutionary conservation than sequences under little selective pressure, such as the central regions of introns. TWINSCAN is designed for the analysis of high-throughput genomic sequences containing an unknown number of genes.
	
UniGene	Project and database at NCBI aimed at defining gene-oriented clusters of expressed sequence tags (ESTs). Sets of ESTs are clustered based on strong sequence homology in an attempt to define a specific, nonredundant cluster for each transcript in a tissue or genome. Each UniGene cluster contains sequences that represent a unique gene in addition to information about the tissue types in which the gene has been expressed and map location.
	
UTR	Untranslated region. Section of messenger RNA (mRNA) that either precedes (5' UTR) or follows (3' UTR) the coding region and is not itself translated. The UTR contains several regulatory regions, including the polyadenylation (polyA) site in the 3' UTR, sequences involved in the initiation of translation (in the 5' UTR), and binding regions for proteins and other regulatory molecules in both the 3' and 5' UTR.
	
Wildcard character	Character used to substitute for any other character(s) in a string.
	
Xenolog	Gene found in an unrelated species and that is related by gene transfer rather than common vertical descent.
